now for 75 years the UN relief and works
Agency for Palestinian refugees has been
a Lifeline for millions of Palestinians
living in Exile it became synonymous
with their right to return but in recent
months unwa has been facing an
unprecedented funding crisis many of its
International donor suspended funding
after Israel alleged some of its workers
were involved in the October 7th attack
by Hamas those accusations have still
not been verified nearly all of Gaza
relies on the agency for basic
necessities it's also active outside of
the strip working in the occupied West
Bank and occupied East Jerusalem as well
as Syria Lebanon and Jordan unwa was
created by the UN General Assembly in
1949 the year after the catastrophe
Israel has argued the agency perpetuates
the issue of Palestinian refugees by
allowing them to transfer their Refugee
status across Generations Israel has
refused to accept their right of return
samrose is the director of plan at the
United Nations Agency for Palestinian
refugees he's in Rafa and joins us now
live good to have you with us Mr rose on
the program obviously you're in Rafa but
how do you plan for you might say the
Palestinians in Gaza and even the West
Bank to a certain extent with an
occupier that won't give you full access
to those you're trying to
help yes thanks for having me on
particularly on this NAA day which of
course as others have said is a time for
for somber reflection it's particularly
difficult right now to operate in Gaza
and in the West Bank given the the
restrictions that that we face on our
operations incredibly difficult times
we've seen the incidents in East
Jerusalem closures that have been a
Facts of Life in the West Bank for 20 30
years and a fact of life in gazra as
well but of course that is coupled by
with with kind of horrific Relentless
ongoing bombardments and your previous
correspondent talked about the sound of
sirens to commemorate the uh the nap but
today all we have in Gaza are f-16s and
the constant buzzing of drones overheads
as people remember but they also
continue to live in fear of of their
lives and focus much more on the
immediate on on on the Here and Now
particularly in Rafa where hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of people are
packing up and are on the Move yeah
let's talk about the here and now
because I mean un official after un
official has been warning of famine it's
been confirmed in certain areas I of the
Gaza Strip and doctors have told us here
on Al jazer that some cases of adults
and children have died of famine related
causes I mean how is this subject being
dealt with in terms of preparation as to
when you can get extra Aid into Gaza
because at the moment you can't and
people are
dying that's right I mean we have had
some successes in in recent days in in
bringing Aid into Northern Gaza which
was where the situation was most acute
but we have completely seen we' seen
those gains reverse completely in in
southern Gaza which was already facing a
situation of catastrophic food
insecurity in terms of numbers in terms
of a pace of decline of the situation
that has few parallels anywhere in in in
modern modern history and and that
situation became much more difficult
with the uh the the onset of of the uh
the occupation in toafa about a week and
a half ago and there are really two main
reasons for that one is the the shutting
of the main Crossing points it becomes
increasingly and difficult and and
almost impossible to bring Aid in
certainly impossible at the volumes we
were seeing before the operation uh at
the scale required and the frequency
required but but the second element of
this is that food Aid alone will not
Stave off famine
famine uh relief efforts require water
they require s sanitation proper
infrastructure Health Care Etc we have
half a million people on the Move in in
Rafer and it's simply impossible to
provide those services to people in
these conditions I jump in there Mr Rose
just very briefly because we're running
out of time it to a certain extent
because when you talk about that Aid
that Aid is being halted and stopped
even attacked as it nears those Gaza
crossings by Israeli protesters or
Israeli settlers so I wonder from your
perspective how do you protest to the
Israeli authorities about this and is
anyone
listening we protest at the highest
levels as the the United Nations we also
call on the member states of the United
Nations to use their influence and their
advocacy and and their lobbying to put
an end to this so yes we do everything
that that we can but unfortunately right
now we are yet to see those efforts
yield fruit and we have very very little
time here this is an increasingly urgent
situation unless we do something about
it in the coming days an already
desperate situation will become far far
worse we'll leave you there for now
really appreciate you joining us we know
that it's difficult to get that
connection to raer with you right now so
Sam Rose uh from the United Nations
Agency for Palestinian refugees thank
you for joining
us make sure to subscribe to our channel
to get the latest news from alaz out